---
layout: post
title: Setting up Gitolite
date: 2013-06-29 12:00
category: Git
tags: [Git, Gitolite]
---

[Git][Git] by itself does not provide any mechanism for
fine grained access to a single project by multiple people.
[Gitolite][Gitolite] adds a layer on top of [Git][Git]
which provides this ability.

# Gitolite Installation

[Gitolite][Gitolite] works by having multiple public
keys stored for a single `git` user.

The first step is to add the user `git`.

{% highlight bash %}
sudo adduser --disabled-login --disabled-password git
# or, with useradd instead of adduser
sudo useradd git
sudo passwd -d git
{% endhighlight %}

It is a smart idea to limit the priveleges of the `git`
account since normally no one would ever login under this user.
The only access should be through `sudo`.

{% highlight bash %}
git clone git://github.com/sitaramc/gitolite
mkdir $HOME/bin
gitolite/install -to $HOME/bin
{% endhighlight %}

Finally we need to install a public ssh key to enable
access for the first user.  In this example it is copied
out of a users directory and then added by the `git` user.

{% highlight bash %}
(another terminal for the user jeri)
cp .ssh/id_rsa.pub /tmp/jeri.pub

(git user)
$HOME/bin/gitolite setup -pk /tmp/jeri.pub
{% endhighlight %}

After this point all further administration tasks
are performed by checking out (`clone`) the `gitolite-admin`
project.

{% highlight bash %}
jeri$ git clone git@hudson.localdomain:gitolite-admin
{% endhighlight %}

To add a new user add their public key to:

{% highlight bash %}
gitolite-admin/keydir/<name>.pub
{% endhighlight %}

And to create a new project edit `gitolite.conf`.

{% highlight bash %}
gitolite-admin/conf/gitolite.conf
{% endhighlight %}

 [Git]: http://git-scm.com
 [Gitolite]: https://github.com/sitaramc/gitolite
 [Gitweb]: https://git.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Gitweb
 [Cgit]: http://git.zx2c4.com/cgit
 [Apache]: http://www.apache.org

# Install Without a `git` User

Ideally when Gitolite is installed it would be done under a
new `git` user which wouldn't have access to any sensitive data.
But in some cases it may not be possible to create a new account.
Perhaps you want to setup a Git repo under the account where
your website is hosted, for example.

To accomplish this the Gitolite install is performed the same
as before except under some non-git user.  But complications arise
when a user tries to access the account.  The user needs to be able
to do two different things: login using ssh and checkout Git projects.
But Gitolite takes over the user key so that it runs the Gitolite shell
is invoked makes it impossible to login with this key.

To fix problem the client needs to setup a `~/.ssh/config`.
Using the ssh config it is possible to configure it to use a particular
key for a particular host.  So, assuming you can get a `git.` DNS entry
added, it should be possible to both login and access Git.

The following is an example `~/.ssh/config`.  Essentially it says
when accessing `git.example.com` using the keys with the prefix `id_rsa.git`
and login as the user `miah`.  In all other cases it will use
just the standard `id_rsa` prefixed keys.

    Host git.example.com 
    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_rsa.git
    User miah

The following command would create the key for the above example.

    ssh-keygen -t rsa -f ~/.ssh/id_rsa.git

Now it is possible to both login and checkout Git
projects from a single user account.

    $ git clone miah@git.example.com:testing

    $ ssh miah@example.com

