---
layout: post
title: "Linux Developer Notes"
date: 2014-12-11 1:00
category: Linux
tags: [Linux]
---

This is a collection of notes accumulated while working on Linux.
Topics include building/configuring the kernel, using Git, and using
Mutt.

This information is most relevant to Linux but it also applies to other
large development projects which use a similar development model such as
Git[[3]] or Subsurface[[11]].

# Kernel

## Retrieving The Kernel Sources

Use `git clone` to retrieve a particular branch.

linux-stable (Greg Kroah-Hartman):

    git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/stable/linux-stable.git

linux-next:

    git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/next/linux-next.git

linux (Linus Torvalds):

    git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git

## Following Upstream

When a project is cloned it is automatically setup to track the origin.
So a `git pull` will automatically pull updates from that origin.
Local changes are kept local an updates can be pulled from upstream.

But suppose you have a mirror of the upstream project on your own server.
If you clone from your project then it will not be setup to pull updates
from the origin.

To git around this situation the `git remote` can be used along with
`git pull -u`.  Consider the following example.

First you clone from your server.

    git clone git@github.com:jmahler/git

Then add the upstream remote.  To view your remotes try `remote -v`.

    git remote add upstream git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/git/git

Finally, you need to configure your local branch to track upstream
and not origin (your server).  Here the `pu` branch is used.

    git branch -u upstream/pu pu

There are several ways to use `branch -u`, this is one of the more explicit
variations.

## Configuring a Kernel

There are many ways to configure a kernel.  When starting from scratch,
with no existing configuration, a good starting place is to use the
config provided with the Linux distribution.

    cp /boot/config-`uname -r` .config

Often the kernel sources being used are newer than the kernel provided
by the distribution.  There may be new features that need to be added to
the configuration.  To update the configuration `oldconfig` can be used.
It will prompt for each new feature and ask whether it should be enabled
in the configuration.

    make oldconfig

A downside of using the config file from a distribution is that it
includes everything needed to support lots of different systems.  Most
of this is not necessary for one specific system.  And because of this
extra code it will take a long time to build a kernel.

One way to reduce compile time is to reduce the configuration to just
what is needed for a specific system.  The `localmodconfig` [[9]]
command can be used to accomplish this.

    make localmodconfig

`localmodconfig` works by looking at the modules which are currently
loaded on your system (`lsmod`).  This means that hot pluggable devices,
such as usb, should have been plugged in once so that the modules were
loaded.  Note, modules are not unloaded after a device is un-plugged.

`localmodconfig` will only remove config options, it will not add them.
This makes a distribution provided config, which has lots of config
options for lots of modules, a good starting point.

Invariably a module will be missed from the configuration and have to be
added later.  While `localmodconfig` will not add the module, it will
display a message.  Then `menuconfig` can be used to manually add the
module and update the configuration.

## Building and Installing a Kernel

Two different ways to build and install a kernel will be discussed here.
The first is the manual method which only use the scripts that come with
the Linux kernel.  The second will build an entire .deb package.

To build using the manual method simply type `make`.  The `-j` option
can be used to take advantage of multiple processors.

    make -j2

Once this is complete they are installed.

    sudo make modules_install install

To build a .deb the `make-kpkg` command is used.

    make-kpkg -j2 --rootcmd fakeroot --initrd kernel_image

The resulting .deb will be in the parent directory and can be installed
using `dpkg`.

    sudo dpkg -i ../linux-image-3.15.0-rc5_3.15.0-rc5-10.00.Custom_amd64.deb

These two different methods each have their benefits.  The manual method
does less work during a rebuild.  `make-kpkg` seems to do everything
from a full clean every time.  The manual method will install the files
but they have to be manually removed.  Usually it is easy to find what
to remove in `/boot` and `/lib/modules` but it is not as clean as a .deb
which is easy to install and remove without leaving any files behind.
Also, if the files are manually removed, `update-grub` must be run as
well.

The manual method is better suited for developers where rebuild time is
important.  For distributing a kernel the .deb method is better because
of the clean install/remove process.

## Custom Kernel Release Name

In some cases it is necessary to compile two different kernels which
happen to have the same release name.  The problem that arises is that
`make install` will install them both in the same place.  To get around
this issue the `CONFIG_LOCALVERSION` option can be added/edited in the
kernel's `.config`.

    CONFIG_LOCALVERSION="myversion"

## Building Modules

The modules can be built independently from the kernel by using the `M=`
option.

    make M=scripts
    make M=drivers/staging/comedi/drivers

Note, using `M=` does not override the kernel `.config`, if they are not
enabled they won't be built.

To add extra flags use the `EXTRA_CFLAGS` variable.

    make EXTRA_CFLAGS="-DDEBUG" M=drivers/staging/comedi/drivers

# Patches

## Typical Work Flow

    (make some changes)
    git commit -F log.txt --signoff
    git format-patch --cover-letter --reroll-count=2 -1
    (edit the cover letter)
    git send-email --to foo@bar.com --cc foo2@bar.com v2-0*

## Log Messages

The width of a log message should be limited so that it fits on a 80
character terminal without wrapping.  A good rule of thumb is to use 72
characters.  This works for git log messages, which add 4 spaces.  And
it also works on mailing lists, where patch comments can be several
levels deep.

## Tags

    Signed-off-by:
    Reviewed-by:
    Tested-by:
    Suggested-by:
    Reported-by:
    Acked-by:
    Cc:
    Link: http://www.kernel.org

## Formatting Patches

Before commits can be sent by email they need to be formatted.  The `git
format-patch` command is used to do this.  It will produce a patch in
mbox format which can be sent with `git send-email`.

    git format-patch -1     # last change
    git format-patch -2     # last 2 changes

    git format-patch --cover-letter -1      # add a cover letter

    git format-patch --reroll-count=2 -1    # version 2

    git format-patch --signoff -1           # add a Signed-off-by
    * Note: --signoff can also be added during a commit

    git format-patch --signoff -1           # add a Signed-off-by

## Cover Letter

It is helpful to add a cover letter than gives an introduction to the
patch series.  It should also describe what has been done in previous
versions and possibly links to previous conversations.  Also, ordering
the changes in descending order helps to show what has most recently
changed.

    Changes in v3:
      - Removed #ifdef in header file.
    
    Changes in v2:
      - Changed strnncmp to use strncmp instead of memcmp.

## Check Patch

Linux includes a tool called `checkpatch.pl` for checking patches for
any style errors and other sorts of problems.  Always run this tool and
fix any problems before submitting a patch [[6],[7]].

    ./scripts/checkpatch.pl 0001-my-first-patch.patch

## Retrieving Patches

Often when going through the log history it is necessary to look at a
single patch.  There are many way to specify revisions (`gitrevisions(5)`) but
a short way to request the first patch (-1) from a given sha1.

    git format-patch -1 6630f11b

## Emailing Patches

Before emailing a patch it is necessary to determine who to send
that patch to.  The mailing list for the project is always good.
But it is also good to send it to people who have worked on the code.

Linux includes the `get_maintainer.pl` script to find all the relevant
people.

    ./scripts/get_maintainer.pl 0001-my-first-patch.patch

Alternatively, it can be used directly on a file.

    ./scripts/get_maintainer.pl --file drivers/staging/comedi/drivers/ssv_dnp.c

The preferred way to send a patch is using `git send-email`.
It will also parse the patch and recommended additional email addresses
to send the patch to.  Often those with `Signed-off-by`, `Cc`, or other tags.

    git send-email --to jmmahler@gmail.com --cc linux-kernel@vger.kernel.org \
        0001-my-first-patch.patch

Aliases can be used to avoid having to type the full email addresses
every time [[8]].

    git send-email --to jmm --cc linux 0001-my-first-patch.patch

## Reply To Revisions

Often a patch will be submitted.  Then others will comment on it.
And then revised patches will be submitted.  It is important to keep
this discussion as linear and coherent as possible.  Imagine if they
joined the conversation at revision 8, could they easily lookup the
previous discussion?

One way to do this is to have each to patch revision start a new subject
but provide links to the previous discussions on a mailing list.

    Version 3 of the patch series to cleanup duplicate name_compare()
    functions (previously was 'add strnncmp() function' [1]).  
    
    [1]: http://marc.info/?l=git&m=140299051431479&w=2

Another more advanced way is to make the new patch revision a reply to the
previous by using the "Message-id".  The first step is to find the
message id in the email headers.

    ...
    Subject: [PATCH 1/2] fixed commit
    Date: Sun, 22 Jun 2014 08:01:44 -0700
    Message-Id: <1403449304-551-1-git-send-email-jmmahler@gmail.com>
    X-Mailer: git-send-email 2.0.0
    ...

Next, the `--in-reply-to` option is used with `send-email`.  Be sure to
quote the id or else the shell might mis-interpret the meaning.

    git send-email \
      --in-reply-to="<1403449304-551-1-git-send-email-jmmahler@gmail.com>" \
      --to=jmm 0002-added-.gitignore.patch

Now the discussion of an entire patch series can be done in one thread
with no breaks.

## Reviewing Patches

Giving clear and concise feedback about a small patch is not too
difficult.  However, if the patch is very large this can be difficult.
The most common way is to point out lots of issues about a single patch.
Another way is to have one reply address only one issue [[18]].

## Applying a Mailed Patch

A patch received in an email can be applied by using the `git am` command.
It accepts the message in mbox format which contains not only the diff
but also the log message to be used for git.

    git am patch.mbox

# Mutt

## Email Aliases

Having to type a full email address in to `git send-email` can get
tedious.  Luckily, aliases can be setup to make this easier.  The
configuration is done in Mutt but `send-email` uses the same
configuration.

First, configuration variables are added to Git.

    git config --global sendemail.aliasfiletype mutt
    git config --global sendemail.aliasesfile $HOME/.muttrc

Then the aliases should be added to the `~/.muttrc`.

    alias jmm Jeremiah Mahler <jmmahler@gmail.com>
    alias git git@vger.kernel.org

Now send-email can be used with an alias.

    git send-email --to jmm --cc git  00*.patch

## Applying Patches

On big projects, such as the Linux kernel, patches are communicated
among the developers by email.  Applying patches from these emails needs
to be quick and easy.  In Mutt this can be accomplished using macros
which allow a key to be bound to a sequence of commands.

The following commands were added to `~/.muttrc`.  The first command
disables the default key binding for `p`.  The second creates a macro to
pipe the currently selected message to `git am`.  This will apply the
patch to the project in the users current working directory.

    # ~/.muttrc
    bind index,pager p noop
    macro index,pager p "<pipe-entry>git am<enter>" "git am <email patch>"

## Editing Patches

In some cases `git format-patch` and `git send-email` do not do what is
desired.  For example, attaching a file is difficult with `send-email`.
Luckily, Mutt can be used to edit a formatted patch by using the `-H`
option.

    git format-patch -1
    mutt -H 0001-mypatch.patch

*NOTE*: Attaching files to emails is generally frowned upon in the
Linux Kernel mailing list but it might be useful in other situations.

# Bisecting a Problem

Often a problem will arise with a new kernel which wasn't present in a
previous kernel.  A good way to find the problem is by using `git bisect` [[10]].

    $ git bisect start
    $ git bisect bad                  # (current revision is bad)
    $ git bisect good next-20141028   # (tag of good revision)

Then `git` will checkout the next version to try.  You then build the
kernel as usual, test it out, and then mark it as good or bad.

    $ git bisect good

OR

    $ git bisect bad

And this process is repeated until no more revisions are left to try and
the patch that caused the problem is found.

# References

  [1] [http://kernelnewbies.org][1]
  [1]: http://kernelnewbies.org

  [2] [http://kernelnewbies.org/KernelBuild][2]
  [2]: http://kernelnewbies.org/KernelBuild

  [3] [http://git.kernel.org][3]
  [3]: http://git.kernel.org

  [4] [http://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/debian-faq/ch-kernel.en.html][4]
  [4]: http://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/debian-faq/ch-kernel.en.html

  [5] [Linux Kernel in a Nutshell][5]
  [5]: http://www.kroah.com/lkn/

  [6] [YouTube: Write and Submit your first Linux kernel Patch][6]
  [6]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LLBrBBImJt4

  [7] [linux/Documentation/CodingStyle][7]
  [7]: https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/CodingStyle

  [8] [Linus Project Development][8]
  [8]: http://jmahler.github.io/linux/2014/04/08/linus-dev.html

  [9] [kconfig: localmodconfig for v2.6.32][9]
  [9]: http://lwn.net/Articles/352241/

  [10] [Debugging with Git][10]
  [10]: http://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Debugging-with-Git

  [11] [Subsurface][11]
  [11]: http://git.hohndel.org/?p=subsurface.git

  [12] [Junio on code churn patches][12]
  [12]: http://thread.gmane.org/gmane.comp.version-control.git/245133/focus=245144
  [13] [Theodore Tso on code churn (wankery)][13]
  [13]: https://lkml.org/lkml/2014/6/10/819

  [14] [Peff: using git rebase to test a patch series][14]
  [14]: http://marc.info/?l=git&m=140316809529679&w=2

  [15] [Felipe Contreras: git-send-email-tricks][15]
  [15]: http://felipec.wordpress.com/2009/10/25/git-send-email-tricks/

  [16] [Kroah on Top Posting][16]
  [16]: https://lkml.org/lkml/2005/1/11/111

  [17] [Linus on Trivial Patches][17]
  [17]: https://lkml.org/lkml/2004/12/20/255

  [18] [[net-next,v3] Add support of Cavium Liquidio ethernet adapters][18]
  [18]: https://patchwork.ozlabs.org/patch/422749/

