---
layout: post
title: "BeagleBone Black Flash Optimization"
date: 2014-02-25 1:00
category: Linux
tags: [Linux]
---

# Introduction

When using a solid state drive in Linux several configuration changes
should be made to optimize its
operation ([ArchLinux: Solid State Drives][asdd]).

  [asdd]: https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Solid_State_Drives

The BeagleBone Black does not have and SSD but it use flash memory in the
form of a microSD card.
And it can benefit from similar optimizations to those of SSDs.

  [bbb]: http://beagleboard.org/Products/BeagleBone+Black

This document describes the options that worked with the BeagleBone Black.

# Periodic TRIM Using cron

To periodically discard unneeded bytes from the disc the <code>fstrim</code>
program can be used.
To run this daily using cron, the following script can be placed in
<code>/etc/cron.daily/fstrim</code>.

    #!/bin/sh
    
    OUT="$(fstrim -v /)"
    logger "fstrim.sh: ${OUT}"

To see if there were bytes to be discarded it can be manually run.

    root:~# fstrim -v /
    /: 4928004096 bytes were trimmed
    root:~#

# Mount Options

The <code>noatime</code> is good for reducing writes which can be
costly with flash devices.
The following is an <code>/etc/fstab</code> from a BeagleBone Black.

    # /etc/fstab: static file system information.
    #
    # Use 'blkid' to print the universally unique identifier for a
    # device; this may be used with UUID= as a more robust way to name devices
    # that works even if disks are added and removed. See fstab(5).
    #
    # <file system> <mount point>   <type>  <options>       <dump>  <pass>
    # / was on /dev/mmcblk0p5 during installation
    UUID=3b08c2a7-b255-4c91-a71c-45456202bf48 /               ext4    noatime,errors=remount-ro 0       1
    # swap was on /dev/mmcblk0p6 during installation
    UUID=01421e62-2159-4e7b-a888-54cf3140794c none            swap    sw              0       0
    /dev/mmcblk0p1    /boot/uboot    auto    defaults    0    0

# I/O Scheduler

The I/O Schedule should be changed from <code>cfq</code> which was optimized
for spinning hard drives to <code>noop</code> or <code>deadline</code>.

The following is an <code>/etc/rc.local</code> script which would
change the scheduler to <code>noop</code> on bootup.

    #!/bin/sh -e
    #
    # rc.local
    #
    # This script is executed at the end of each multiuser runlevel.
    # Make sure that the script will "exit 0" on success or any other
    # value on error.
    #
    # In order to enable or disable this script just change the execution
    # bits.
    #
    # By default this script does nothing.
    
    echo noop > /sys/block/mmcblk0/queue/scheduler
    echo noop > /sys/block/mmcblk1/queue/scheduler
    
    exit 0
